There isn't much difference between Cartland and Jabo when it comes to generics and how to use them.
But you can do a few more things in cotland.
But before we get to that let's do a whirlwind review of generics to make sure we're all on the same
page.
Now you used generics to give the compiler a hint about what types of objects you're dealing with often
when related to collections.
And this also allows the compiler to do some error checking at compile time.
For example let's declare a list in Java.
I've already created a java file with a main method so will say list list equals new array list.
Now we've created a list but there's no indication of what type of object we want to store in the list.
Maybe we'll store some mixed type objects but more likely we'll want to store strings or employees or
cars.
It's better for us to specify what will store because the compiler can then catch errors at compile
time.
The code is clearer and we won't have to cast so often.
We use generics to specify the type.
In this case we'll create an array list of string.
So all we have to do is add string here so we add string between angle brackets after the collection
type.
So let's now go ahead and add a string to the list so will say list.
Add And let's add hello and I need the pesky semi-colons now because we're in Java.
And now let's try adding something that isn't a string so we'll say list start at and now let's add
a decimal ten point five.
And of course we can do it.
We get a compile time error so because we provided the type the compiler can now do type checking at
compile time.
So now let's call uppercase on the string that we added so will say list get zero Daut.
And you'll notice that we're getting suggestions for the string class.
So at this point the compiler will know that the element that we're going to get is a string.
Because this is a list of string and we'll just select to uppercase and we can now call to uppercase
without having to cast.
Because as I said the compiler knows that the item that we're going to get is a string so we can use
generics whenever we want to be more specific about a type we can use them with parameters as return
values from functions and in declarations.
We can also do the following in Java.
We can say list to list one equals a new array list and then we can say lists start add and let's add.
Good by this time.
Now here we haven't provided the type and there's no compile error so we don't have to provide the type.
But it's good practice to do so.
All right so now let's go over to Kallen.
So we're going to declare a mutable list because we're going to want to add elements to it after we've
created it.
So I'll say Vau list and we're going to make an immutable list.
Now you'll notice we're going to get an error here because we haven't specified a type for the list.
So back here in Java we were able to declare a list and not say anything about the type.
But here in CANTLIN the compiler is complaining.
And that's because in cotland you have to use a generic type when with collections.
So unlike Java the best practice of doing that is enforced.
So we're going to use strings as we didn't Javaris all say string string and then we'll say mutable
list of an all give it hello like we had in Java.
Now of course now that I'm using this we can remove that.
I deliberately put the typed in on the variable because I wanted to show you that the compiler would
complain if we didn't use provide the type in the list.
OK so now we'll continue to do what we did in Java.
So we want to uppercase the first element so will say list 0 dot to uppercase and that works.
So this is the equivalent now of what we had in Java.
So now let's take a look at how to use generics with functions.
So let's say we have the following function fun.
Print collection and we'll say it accepts a collection and we have a collection of strings so we want
a collection of string.
Remember you have to provide a generic type so I'll say for item in collection.
Print line the item.
So let's add another string to our list so that we have a more interesting list here so will say Alliston
add another string and then we'll print the collection
and mail run now
and we'll see that we get our strings in our collection.
So that's great.
All right now let's create a list of big decimal numbers.
I'm going to comment or actually I'll just remove this because it's kind of hanging there and we're
not doing anything with it.
So we'll say Val B list equals mutable list of.
And in this case I want to tell it the type here by providing the initial value civil same minus thirty
three point forty five.
And we'll say the decimal 3 5 0.
Three point ninety nine and let's see that one more decimal zero point three to nine.
OK so now we're going to call our print collection function to print this list here.
So all saying you can probably guess it's going to happen.
Print collection and we'll say B-D list.
And we're going to get an error here because it's going to say well you want a list of string for this
function and you are providing me with a list of big decimals so sorry but that doesn't work.
Now obviously we don't want to have to create a print collection function for every possible type of
lists that we might want to deal with.
Unfortunately we don't have to.
Just like in Java we'll use t as the generic type which means any type.
So we'll change our declaration here will say Chih.
And then over here we'll say to you as well.
So here we're saying that this function will accept any type of list.
Now once we use t here we have to put this t here as well to indicate that the function is using generics
and this T and angle brackets after the find key word is called the type parameter declaration.
Now there's really nothing new here compared to Java.
But I want to make sure we're all on the same page before we start looking at some of the more serious
stuff like covariance and contravariant is also the Cartland standard library is filled with functions
that use generics so if you don't understand how to read function signatures you'll have a difficult
time understanding what the function expects and what it returns.
So now it's called a print collection function with the big decimal list.
Well actually we're already doing that and will see that the error has gone away.
So we can actually run this now.
And we'll see our strings list printed and then our big decimals.
So what we're saying here is will now accept a list of any type.
Now we could have written this function differently we could have instead of making it a top level function
we could have made it an extension function for a list of T.
So let's do it that way now so instead of passing the list as a parameter we'll call the function on
the list.
And we really just have to put a list t here.
Daut and then remove that parameter and then of course insight instead of collection we'll just say
this because remember when your using a in defining an extension function you use this to refer to the
instance that you're going to use to invoke the function.
So now that print collection is it is an extension function on list.
It will be invoked using an instance of list and we refer to that instance as this inside the extension
function.
So we'll have to update our two calls because the print collection that takes a list doesn't exist anymore
so one will want to say list dot print collection and we don't need the parameter anymore.
And the same thing here.
B the list Daut and we don't need the parameter anymore and if we run
we'll see that we get the same thing.
So if you want to define a an extension function that can be invoked which is a collection of type T
then this is the way that you would do it or anytime that you want to define an extension function on
a class that takes a type T.
This is the way that you would do it.
Now print collections was doing something that wasn't silly and that your application would do a lot.
It might make sense to write it as an extension function.
You might also want to do it as an extension function if you want it to make the function available
to everyone on your development team.
And if you want it the idea to include it in its suggestions as we've said before.
Now in addition to having a generic type as the function parameter of course you can always use generics
in the function's return type specific type that will be returned can be inferred by the compiler and
you can also as in Java declare generic classes and interfaces.
OK so now that we've had that whirlwind tour of generics will move into some of them more Katlin specific
stuff and we'll do that in the next video.